README.md, before:

# MLIR Lighthouse Project

This project implements the RFC: https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-mlir-project-lighthouse/86738

_"In essence, this project should guide you through using MLIR for your own projects, showing the way, but not forcing you to follow a particular path. Essentially, the role of a lighthouse."_

## Project Status

[![Lighthouse Examples](https://github.com/llvm/lighthouse/actions/workflows/examples.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/llvm/lighthouse/actions/workflows/examples.yml)

[![Lint](https://github.com/llvm/lighthouse/actions/workflows/lint.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/llvm/lighthouse/actions/workflows/lint.yml)

### Disclaimer

This project uses LLVM to test and validate various pipelines and assumptions about the MLIR project, but it is not part of any LLVM releases, nor is a dependency for MLIR to operate.

You should use this project to guide you through MLIR pipelines, schedules and transforms, as well as understanding how to connect ingress frameworks and how to execute the egress on appropriate hardware.

## Project Overview

The project is separated into three parts:
* **Ingress:** Frameworks that convert source objects (code, models, designs) into MLIR files that the MLIR project can consume.
* **Scheduler**: The core MLIR component that allows one to choose particular schedules, transforms, dialects to construct pipelines and pass that MLIR ingress through and reach some egress format (LLVM IR, SPIR-V, etc).
* **Runtime**: Environments that can consume the egress format, install/load the appropriate libraries and tools, and execute the output on some target (hardware, simulator, further tools).

The upstream _lighthouse_ project needs to keep the three parts restricted to upstream / publicly available technology. In essence, public ingress and conversion projects, upstream MLIR dialects and transforms, and public execution engines that can be automatically installed and executed without going through private repositories, license agreement, etc.

A downstream fork of the _lighthouse_ project could extend any and all of the three parts to reach private repositories and tools, execute downstream schedules, load private dialects, etc.

The main purposes of this project, in chronological order, are:
1. To **test and validate the existing assumptions in the upstream MLIR repository**, by encoding common ingress paths, transform schedules, pipelines, target differentiation and basic execution.
2. To help MLIR developers **find common patterns on their pipelines**, and propose actions to merge and reuse upstream code for the same purposes.
3. Once common patterns are detected, to **discuss and agree on dialect design, canonical shapes, and common invariants**, to promote upstream and downstream collaboration on the same grounds.
4. Build a solid base to guide downstream projects (open or closed source) to **fork this project and build on top of it**, making it easier to separate upstream/downstream parts and make it easier to upstream the delta to MLIR and/or the _lighthouse_.
5. In time, this could eventually be the **seed for official upstream tooling that uses MLIR in production environments**, like Clang is to LLVM.

### Upstream MLIR / upstream Lighthouse

One key point in the proposal was to not hold _"load bearing"_ code in this repository, but instead, upstream it to MLIR proper and _use_ it here.

It should be fine to have schedule descriptions, aggregation transforms and passes that _use_ the upstream MLIR transforms and passes, but we should _not_ add actual transforms, dialects and passes here to _complement_ the MLIR story.

## Testing Framework

This project should have the same initial purpose as the LLVM Test Suite [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-test-suite], but for MLIR.

## Current Status

Since this is a new project, we're separating the work in branches that will eventually be merged to `main`.
After the initial period, when we have a reasonable testing infrastructure, we can fork & create pull requests.

The planned work is:
* **Ingress**: PyTorch to Linalg extraction on branch [TBD].
* **Harness**: Python harness to bind the MLIR tools, dialects and transforms together on branch [harness](https://github.com/llvm/lighthouse/tree/harness).
* **Schedule**: MLIR schedules to combine into pipelines and combination strategy on branch [TBD].
* **Runtime**: Dependencies, tools and environments to run on various hardware on branch [TBD].
* **Build System**: CMake / Bazel magic to check dependencies, track repositories, run CI on branch [TBD].

## Getting up and running

For the time being, `lighthouse` depends on just the Python bindings for [`mlir`](https://github.com/llvm/eudsl/releases).
To install this dependency along with `lighthouse` python package, obtain the [`uv`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/#pypi) Python package manager and run the following in the root of the project:
```
$ uv venv  # Create a .venv virtualenv
$ uv sync  # Install the `mlir-python-bindings` and `lighthouse` into the virtualenv
$ uv sync --extra ingress-torch-cpu  # Optionally install the dependencies for torch ingress
```

<details>
<summary>
A note on vendor-specific `torch` versions.
</summary>
For vendor-specific versions of `torch` use the targets `ingress-torch-nvidia`, `ingress-torch-rocm` or `ingress-torch-xpu` for Nvidia, AMD, and Intel-enabled versions, respectively.
</details>

To run the Python programs in this repo, either enter the virtual environment (`$ source .venv/bin/activate`) and execute a program _or_ execute each of the programs through `uv` (i.e. `$ uv run $EXE`), which will automatically run them inside the virtualenv.

## Installing Lighthouse as a Python package

You can install `lighthouse` as a Python package using `uv` or `pip`:

#### Installing via `uv`

If you've run the steps from the [Getting up and running](#getting-up-and-running) section,
you already have `lighthouse` installed in your virtual environment:

```
$ uv run python
Python 3.12.11 | (main, Jun  4 2025, 14:45:31) [GCC 13.3.0] on linux
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>> import lighthouse
>>> lighthouse.__version__
'0.1.0a1'
```

If you don't want to use the virtual environment created by `uv`, you can skip `uv venv; uv sync` steps and install Lighthouse in your current environment using:

```
$ source ../my_custom_venv/bin/activate # or conda activate my-venv
(my-venv) $ uv pip install . # installs Lighthouse along with its basic dependencies
(my-venv) $ uv pip install .[ingress_torch_cpu] # installs Lighthouse along with its torch-ingress dependencies
```

#### Installing via `pip`

If you don't want to use `uv` to install the package, you can install it directly with `pip`.
You'll need to specify the custom sources so `pip` can find all required dependencies (e.g., mlir-bindings). The sources are listed in the `pyproject.toml` file.

Here are some common installation examples:

1. Install Lighthouse only
```
pip install . \
  --find-links https://llvm.github.io/eudsl/ \
  --only-binary :all:
```

2. Install Lighthouse and torch-ingress dependencies
```
pip install .[ingress_torch_cpu] \
  --find-links https://llvm.github.io/eudsl/ \
  --find-links https://github.com/llvm/torch-mlir-release/releases/expanded_assets/dev-wheels \
  --extra-index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl \
  --only-binary :all:
```

## Running tests

Running the tests is as simple as `lit .` in the root of the project.

We assume that the [`FileCheck`](https://llvm.org/docs/CommandGuide/FileCheck.html) and [`lit`](https://llvm.org/docs/CommandGuide/lit.html) executables are available on the `PATH`.

<details>
<summary>
Obtaining <code>FileCheck</code> and <code>lit</code>.
</summary>
To obtain the <a href="https://pypi.org/project/lit">Python package for <code>lit</code></a>, simply run <code>uv sync</code> (<code>lit</code> is included in the "dev" dependency group).
In case the <code>FileCheck</code> executable happens to be available under a different name/location, e.g. as <code>FileCheck-18</code> from Ubuntu's <code>llvm-dev</code> package, set the <code>FILECHECK</code> environment variable when invoking <code>lit</code>.
</details>

Commit message:

[testing] Tests mark themselves UNSUPPORTED if features aren't available (#35)
Also loosens dependency upon `uv` for running tests -- all that is
required is that `lit` is running in a suitable environment (e.g.
through `uv run lit .` or by first entering a venv and then `lit .`).

Also splits `lighthouse.utils` into two so that the examples/tests that
don't actually depend on `torch` accidentally end up with that dependency
(there was one such such instance).

README.md, after:

# MLIR Lighthouse Project

This project implements the RFC: https://discourse.llvm.org/t/rfc-mlir-project-lighthouse/86738

_"In essence, this project should guide you through using MLIR for your own projects, showing the way, but not forcing you to follow a particular path. Essentially, the role of a lighthouse."_

## Project Status

[![Lighthouse Examples](https://github.com/llvm/lighthouse/actions/workflows/examples.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/llvm/lighthouse/actions/workflows/examples.yml)

[![Lint](https://github.com/llvm/lighthouse/actions/workflows/lint.yml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/llvm/lighthouse/actions/workflows/lint.yml)

### Disclaimer

This project uses LLVM to test and validate various pipelines and assumptions about the MLIR project, but it is not part of any LLVM releases, nor is a dependency for MLIR to operate.

You should use this project to guide you through MLIR pipelines, schedules and transforms, as well as understanding how to connect ingress frameworks and how to execute the egress on appropriate hardware.

## Project Overview

The project is separated into three parts:
* **Ingress:** Frameworks that convert source objects (code, models, designs) into MLIR files that the MLIR project can consume.
* **Scheduler**: The core MLIR component that allows one to choose particular schedules, transforms, dialects to construct pipelines and pass that MLIR ingress through and reach some egress format (LLVM IR, SPIR-V, etc).
* **Runtime**: Environments that can consume the egress format, install/load the appropriate libraries and tools, and execute the output on some target (hardware, simulator, further tools).

The upstream _lighthouse_ project needs to keep the three parts restricted to upstream / publicly available technology. In essence, public ingress and conversion projects, upstream MLIR dialects and transforms, and public execution engines that can be automatically installed and executed without going through private repositories, license agreement, etc.

A downstream fork of the _lighthouse_ project could extend any and all of the three parts to reach private repositories and tools, execute downstream schedules, load private dialects, etc.

The main purposes of this project, in chronological order, are:
1. To **test and validate the existing assumptions in the upstream MLIR repository**, by encoding common ingress paths, transform schedules, pipelines, target differentiation and basic execution.
2. To help MLIR developers **find common patterns on their pipelines**, and propose actions to merge and reuse upstream code for the same purposes.
3. Once common patterns are detected, to **discuss and agree on dialect design, canonical shapes, and common invariants**, to promote upstream and downstream collaboration on the same grounds.
4. Build a solid base to guide downstream projects (open or closed source) to **fork this project and build on top of it**, making it easier to separate upstream/downstream parts and make it easier to upstream the delta to MLIR and/or the _lighthouse_.
5. In time, this could eventually be the **seed for official upstream tooling that uses MLIR in production environments**, like Clang is to LLVM.

### Upstream MLIR / upstream Lighthouse

One key point in the proposal was to not hold _"load bearing"_ code in this repository, but instead, upstream it to MLIR proper and _use_ it here.

It should be fine to have schedule descriptions, aggregation transforms and passes that _use_ the upstream MLIR transforms and passes, but we should _not_ add actual transforms, dialects and passes here to _complement_ the MLIR story.

## Testing Framework

This project should have the same initial purpose as the LLVM Test Suite [https://github.com/llvm/llvm-test-suite], but for MLIR.

## Current Status

Since this is a new project, we're separating the work in branches that will eventually be merged to `main`.
After the initial period, when we have a reasonable testing infrastructure, we can fork & create pull requests.

The planned work is:
* **Ingress**: PyTorch to Linalg extraction on branch [TBD].
* **Harness**: Python harness to bind the MLIR tools, dialects and transforms together on branch [harness](https://github.com/llvm/lighthouse/tree/harness).
* **Schedule**: MLIR schedules to combine into pipelines and combination strategy on branch [TBD].
* **Runtime**: Dependencies, tools and environments to run on various hardware on branch [TBD].
* **Build System**: CMake / Bazel magic to check dependencies, track repositories, run CI on branch [TBD].

## Getting up and running

For the time being, `lighthouse` depends on just the Python bindings for [`mlir`](https://github.com/llvm/eudsl/releases).
To install this dependency along with `lighthouse` python package, obtain the [`uv`](https://docs.astral.sh/uv/getting-started/installation/#pypi) Python package manager and run the following in the root of the project:
```
$ uv venv  # Create a .venv virtualenv
$ uv sync  # Install the `mlir-python-bindings` and `lighthouse` into the virtualenv
$ uv sync --extra ingress-torch-cpu  # Optionally install the dependencies for torch ingress
```

<details>
<summary>
A note on vendor-specific `torch` versions.
</summary>
For vendor-specific versions of `torch` use the targets `ingress-torch-nvidia`, `ingress-torch-rocm` or `ingress-torch-xpu` for Nvidia, AMD, and Intel-enabled versions, respectively.
</details>

To run the Python programs in this repo, either enter the virtual environment (`$ source .venv/bin/activate`) and execute a program _or_ execute each of the programs through `uv` (i.e. `$ uv run $EXE`), which will automatically run them inside the virtualenv.

## Installing Lighthouse as a Python package

You can install `lighthouse` as a Python package using `uv` or `pip`:

#### Installing via `uv`

If you've run the steps from the [Getting up and running](#getting-up-and-running) section,
you already have `lighthouse` installed in your virtual environment:

```
$ uv run python
Python 3.12.11 | (main, Jun  4 2025, 14:45:31) [GCC 13.3.0] on linux
Type "help", "copyright", "credits" or "license" for more information.
>>> import lighthouse
>>> lighthouse.__version__
'0.1.0a1'
```

If you don't want to use the virtual environment created by `uv`, you can skip `uv venv; uv sync` steps and install Lighthouse in your current environment using:

```
$ source ../my_custom_venv/bin/activate # or conda activate my-venv
(my-venv) $ uv pip install . # installs Lighthouse along with its basic dependencies
(my-venv) $ uv pip install .[ingress_torch_cpu] # installs Lighthouse along with its torch-ingress dependencies
```

#### Installing via `pip`

If you don't want to use `uv` to install the package, you can install it directly with `pip`.
You'll need to specify the custom sources so `pip` can find all required dependencies (e.g., mlir-bindings). The sources are listed in the `pyproject.toml` file.

Here are some common installation examples:

1. Install Lighthouse only
```
pip install . \
  --find-links https://llvm.github.io/eudsl/ \
  --only-binary :all:
```

2. Install Lighthouse and torch-ingress dependencies
```
pip install .[ingress_torch_cpu] \
  --find-links https://llvm.github.io/eudsl/ \
  --find-links https://github.com/llvm/torch-mlir-release/releases/expanded_assets/dev-wheels \
  --extra-index-url https://download.pytorch.org/whl \
  --only-binary :all:
```

## Running tests

Running the tests is as simple as `lit .` in the root of the project (in a suitable Python environment, e.g. through `uv run lit .`).

We assume that the [`FileCheck`](https://llvm.org/docs/CommandGuide/FileCheck.html) and [`lit`](https://llvm.org/docs/CommandGuide/lit.html) executables are available on the `PATH`.

<details>
<summary>
Obtaining <code>FileCheck</code> and <code>lit</code>.
</summary>
To obtain the <a href="https://pypi.org/project/lit">Python package for <code>lit</code></a>, simply run <code>uv sync</code> (<code>lit</code> is included in the "dev" dependency group).
In case the <code>FileCheck</code> executable happens to be available under a different name/location, e.g. as <code>FileCheck-18</code> from Ubuntu's <code>llvm-dev</code> package, set the <code>FILECHECK</code> environment variable when invoking <code>lit</code>.
</details>
